Are right in this video we're going to look at merge sort now merge sort is a divide and conquer algorithm
because it involves splitting the array.
You want to store it into a bunch of smaller arrays and it's usually implemented using recursion.
You can write the algorithm using loops but it's usually written recursively merge sort involves two
major phases.
The first phase is the splitting phase and the second phase is the merging phase.
We do the sorting during the merging phase the splitting phase is a preparation phase to make sorting
faster during the merging phase.
Now I want to make it clear that the splitting is logical.
We don't create new arrays when we do the splitting.
We use indices to keep track of where the array has been split so went during the splitting phase we're
not actually creating new array instances.
So let's look at this splitting phase and the splitting phase we start with the unsorted array and we
divide the array into two arrays.
And remember both of the arrays will be unsorted and we call the first array the left array and the
second array the right array and we generally just divide the array down the middle.
If you have an odd number of elements it will depend on the implementation some implementation will
put the extra element into the left array and some implementations will put the extra element into the
right array.
But the important point is you're dividing the array or splitting the array into two arrays.
The left array and the right array and then once you've done that you keep splitting down even further
so now you go to the left array and you split that into a left and a right array and then you split
that left array into a left and right array and you keep going splitting all the arrays and the sub
arrays until you split the original array into a bunch of one element arrays and remember from our discussion
of insertion sort a one element array is sorted by default because there's only one element in it.
So in the splitting phase you're taking the array you're dividing it in half and then you're dividing
the two subways in half and you're dividing those four separate in half etc. until you get down to a
bunch of one element arrays and that is the splitting phase.
Once you've done that you're going to enter the merging phase and in the merging phase you're going
to merge every left right pair into a sorted array.
So let's say we have an array of four elements just to explain this so we're going to split that into
two arrays of lence to each and then we're going to split those two separate into two arrays of one
element.
So from that four element array we're going to end up with for one element sub arrays.
So we split the original array into a left and right array and then we split the left subarray into
left and right and the right sidebar right into left and right and then what we do is we take the two
one element arrays from the left subarray and we merge them back into a two element array.
The merged two element array will be sorted.
So when we do the merge it.
That's the point when we do the sort.
And then we'll take the two elements from the right sub array and we'll merge them into a two element
sub array.
So now we have we're back to two arrays a left and a right array except this time the left and the right
array are sorted.
And then we'll merge the left and right array which are now two elements each back into a four element
array.
And at that point when we do the merge we sort.
So we get a four element to re that's sorted and we have sorted our array.
So basically we take the bunch of one element arrays and we keep merging them into two element for Element
8 element etc. and at each merge we're making sure that the resulting arrays are sorted until we've
merged all the arrays back into one array and at that point that array will be sorted because one remerging
we're sorting.
So every resulting array from the merge will be sorted.
Now the merging phase does not happen in place.
It uses temporary arrays so the splitting phase is in place but we need temporary erase to do the merge.
So let's look at our usual array here our start index will be Ciro our end will be 7 which is equal
to a radar lenth and we're going to get our midpoint by dividing start plus and by 2 so our midpoint
will be three.
And in the implementation I'm going to show you the extra element we'll go into the right array.
So the first time we split the array elements 0 1 and 2 will go into the left array and elements 3 4
5 and 6 we'll go into the right array.
And so now let's split the left array.
So we're not going to do anything with the right array that's in black now and we're going to look at
the left brain for the left array the start index is zero and the end index is three the end index is
always one greater than the index of the last element in the array.
So once again we're going to take the midpoint by adding start to end and dividing by two.
So we'll have three over 2 which has one.
And that means that the first element is going to go in to the left array and elements 1 to 2 are going
to go into the right array.
And so now we have this situation.
Now we have finished splitting 20.
We can't split that any further it's already a one element array.
So we only have to worry at this point about splitting the right array.
So we need to split the array that's occupying positions 1 and 2.
And so the start index is one the end index is three.
The midpoint will be one plus three over two which is two.
And so we're going to put the first element into the left array and the second element into the right
array.
And we have now completed splitting the left array into one element arrays.
Now one in two are both colored in a green shade because they're actually sibling arrays.
We go up for a minute or so left and right arrays are the sibling arrays so these are the two arrays
we're going to merge when we split the left array we ended up with a one element and two element array.
And those arrays are sibling array.
So when we do the merge we'll be merging the array that has 20 with the array that has 35 and minus
15.
We were able to split the right array one more time.
And so the first merge will do.
On the left side we'll be merging 35 with minus 15.
So we're always merging the last split.
OK so let's look at the writer right now.
So the star index is three the end is seven.
The midpoint will be five.
So elements three and four will go into the left array and elements five to six will go into the right
array.
Now let's work on the left array the one that has 7 and 55.
The midpoint will be four.
So we're going to put element 3 to 3 into left and 4 to foreign to right.
And we've now finished splitting the left array on the right side.
So now we're going to split the right array on the right side.
So the start index is 5.
The end index is 7.
The midpoint is 6.
So we're going to put element 5 into the left array and element 6 into the right array.
And we have now completed splitting the right array into one element arrays and once again 7 and 55
are both shaded gold yellow brown whatever you want to however you want to look at that there are shaded
the same because there are sibling arrays there are going to get merged together first.
And the same applies to one.
And mine is 22.
So now we need to merge these arrays back together.
Remember when we do the merge we actually sort.
So every time we merge the resulting array is sorted.
So as I mentioned 35 and minus 15 or sibling left right arrays so they're going to get merged 7 and
55 are going to get merged one in minus 22 are going to get merged 20 won't get merged right now because
it doesn't have a sibling at the moment.
So we started with our original array and then we split that into a left array and the right array and
then that left array was split into left and right and that right array was split into left and right
and then here the right array was split into two element to raise and then they were each split into
two one element to raise and that's what we just went through in the slides.
Now because of the recursive nature of the implementation it's important to note that we're going to
handle the entire left side of the array before we start working with the right side of the array because
you'll see from the implementation that we call a method to partition the left side and then we call
the method to partition the right side.
But that method will call itself recursively.
And so we'll call the method to partition the left side and then it will call methods to partition itself
into left and right and this one we'll call a method to partition itself into left and right.
And so once we start down this path we go down the recursive rabbit hole.
And so by the time the method call to partition the left returns we'll have done all this work and the
same goes for the right side.
So let's move on to the merging step now and you'll see that when we do the merging step we merge backwards
so we merge bottom up and we're going to merge sibling array.
So we'll start by merging 35 with minus 15 and then 7 with 55 and then 1 with minus 22.
And only after we've merged 35 and minus 15 back into a two element sorted array will we then merge
20 with the result etc..
So we're going to merge all these one element to race.
We always merge sibling left and right and each merged array it will be sorted.
And as I said 20 doesn't have a sibling so it's not going to get merged on the first round.
So the way that the merging works is we merge sibling left and right arrays and what we do is we create
a temporary array large enough to hold all the elements in the arrays remerging So on the first round
are temporary arrays will be of lines too because we're going to be merging to one element arrays and
what we do is we set to the first index of the left array and J to the first index of the right array.
And when I say left and right array I mean the two arrays remerging and then we compare the value at
the position in left to the value at the J position in the right array.
And if the value in the left array is smaller we copy that to the temporary array and we increment by
one if the value on the right array is smaller than we copy that to the temporary array and increment
J by 1.
So essentially what we're doing is we're stepping through the left and right arrays and where we're
taking the smallest value between the left and the right and copying it into the temporary Iran if we
keep doing that.
That temporary array will contain the values in sorted order.
So we're going to repeat that until all the elements in both arrays have been processed.
And as I said at that point the temporary array will contain the merged values in sorted order and then
we have one final step to remember we've been copying these values into a temporary array.
So we then have to copy the sorted values back into the original input array the one that we're sorting
at the correct positions.
And so if the left array is that positions X to Y in the original array and the right array is at positions
y plus 1 to Zed.
Then after the copy positions X does and will be sorted in the original array.
So we're going to overwrite what's there in the original array with the sorted values.
So we're going to start by merging the two siblings on the left 35 and minus 15.
So what we'll do is we'll create a temporary two element array.
I will be initialized to 1 because that's the first index in the left array and j will be initialized
to 2 because that's the first index in the right array.
And then we compare array to array J minus 15 is smaller than 35.
There's a typo there that should be 35.
And so we copy minus 15 to the temporary array.
Then we're going to copy 35 to the temporary array and at this point the temporary array will be minus
15 and 35.
And we've now seen all of the elements in the left array and right array that were merging.
So at this point we want a copy of the temporary array back into positions 1 and 2 in the original array.
And so at this point minus 15 and 35 are sorted.
Now they're not in sorted position in the array but the merged array is sorted and the two sibling arrays
have now been merged.
So now we're back to two arrays on the left hand side we're about to 20 and we're back to minus 15 and
35.
So at this point the left array contains 20 and the right array contains minus 15 and 35.
So now we're going to merge those two arrays because 20 and minus 15 and 35 are sibling arrays.
Now there we originally got those two arrays when we flipped the left array.
So we create a temporary array of length 3.
I will be initialized to 0 and j will be initialized to 1 and then we compare arrays 0 to array 1 minus
15.
It's less than 20 so it's going to be copy to the temporary array.
And because we copy the value from the right array into the temporary array we increment J by 1 because
we've processed minus 15 is still zero because we haven't processed 20 yet.
So now we compare 20 to 35 20 is smaller than 35.
So it gets copied next and now only 35 remains and so it's copied last and so the temporary array consists
of minus 15 20 and 35.
And now we copy that back into position 0 to 2 in the original array.
And so at this point we have completed merging the left subgrade.
And as you can see it's in sorted order.
So now we're going to repeat this process with the right part of the array.
We have two sets of siblings 755 and one in minus 22.
So we're going to start by emerging 7 and 55.
So we're going to create a temporary array of lence too.
I will be initialized to 3 and j will be initialized to 4.
We're going to compare array to a Ray-J 7 is smaller than 55 so it gets copied into the temporary array
first and then 55 will get copied.
And then we copy the temporary back to physicians 3 and four.
And so we've now merged the left array of the right part of the original array and 755 or in sorted
order.
Now we repeat this process to merge one in minus 22 the temporary array is going to end up being minus
22 in one.
We're going to copy that back into positions 5 and 6 and we're back to minus 22 and the merged array
is in sorted order it's minus 22 in 1.
So now we have two arrays of lens to them we need to merge those.
So we're going to create a temporary array of length for I will be initialized to 3 and j to 5 minus
22 is less than 7.
So we're going to copy minus 22 to the temporary array and j will be incremented to 6.
So then we're going to compare 7 to one.
One is less than seven.
So one is going to be copy to the temporary array and j will be incremented to 7.
Now only elements in the left array are left and we know that they're sorted because all the merged
arrays are sorted and so all we have to do at this point is just copy the two elements from the left
array into the temporary array and when we've done that the temporary array will be minus 22 1 7 and
55 and we just have to copy that back into positions 3 to 6.
And so now we're back down to just two arrays a left array and a right array that are both in sorted
order and our final step is to merge these left and right arrays.
And so we're going to create a temporary array that has enough room to hold seven elements.
We're going to initialize IDE is 0 and J is 3 minus 22 is less than minus 15 So we're going to copy
minus 22 to the temporary array and then we're going to increment J to 4 minus 15 is less than 1.
So we're going to copy minus 15 to the temporary array and I is going to get incremented to 1.
One is less than 20.
So we copy 1 to the temporary array and we increment J to 5 7 is less than 20 so we copy 7 to the temporary
array and we increment J to 6.
20 is less than 55.
So we copy 20 to the temporary array and we increment to 2 and finally 35 is less than 55.
So we copy 35 to the temporary array and we increment to three and at this point only 55 is left.
So we copy it to the temporary array and now we copy the temporary array back into position 0 to 6 because
we've looked at all the elements and when we do that the array is sorted.
It is quite a bit of work but because we're dividing and conquering we're splitting the array into two
at each phase.
It actually performs better than the algorithms we've seen so far.
So just to remind you of what we had when we started the merging phase we had done all of this splitting.
And then in the merging phase we went from the bottom back up.
So we merged 35 and minus 15 into a two element sorted array minus 15 and 35.
And we did the same thing with these two elements and the same thing with one in minus 22.
And then at that point these guys are now sibling arrays and so we merged the left array with the right
array and we got a sorted three elements array minus 15 20 and 35.
And on this side we had two two element sibling arrays left and right.
We merged them into a sorted array and then finally we merged the original left and right arrays we
got from splitting the whole array except this time they're sorted because we've undergone the merge
step and so we merged the sorted left array with the sorted right array and our result from emerge is
always a sorted array and so we get our original array sorted.
So let's take a look at how this algorithm performs well first of all as I said previously it's not
an in place algorithm the splitting phase is in place but when we do the merging phase we use a temporary
array to merge each pair of sibling arrays.
Now this has of time complexity of 0 to the end log N and the log is to the base 2 and why is that.
Well we're repeatedly dividing the array in half during the splitting phase.
And so this is a logarithmic algorithm.
It's a stable sort algorithm because when we do the merging we check whether the element in the right
array is greater than the element in the left array.
And if it isn't if it's equal to it then the element in the left array will be the one that's copied
into the temporary array first.
And because of that the relative ordering of duplicate items will be preserved.
Now as I mentioned on the last slide the implementation I'm going to show you has a couple of optimizations
and I'll explain those when we go through the implementation.
But it's still merge sort and it's still a logarithmic algorithm.
Now these days memory is cheap and plentiful so the fact it's nodded in place algorithms shouldn't dissuade
you from using it.
But if memory is an issue then that's a consideration because there's a lot of temporary array instances
created and of course the amount of memory you're going to need is going to grow as the number of items
you're sorting grows.
As you'll see the next sort algorithm we look at also uses a divide and conquer philosophy and is also
a logarithmic algorithm but it's an in-place algorithm.
So we'll see that coming up in a couple of videos.
All right.
So that's how Mirch sort works.
Let's implement it.
I'll see you in the next video.